Ingredients
3 h 50 m 4 servings 556 cals



Update Location
1 (4 pound) whole duck, dressed1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon1/2 teaspoon ground ginger1/4 teaspoon ground nutmeg1/4 teaspoon ground white pepper1/8 teaspoon ground cloves3 tablespoons soy sauce1 tablespoon honey1 orange, sliced in rounds1 tablespoon chopped fresh parsley, for garnish5 green onions1/2 cup plum jam1 1/2 teaspoons sugar1 1/2 teaspoons distilled white vinegar1/4 cup finely chopped chutneyAdd all ingredients to list

Rinse the duck inside and out, and pat dry. Cut off tail and discard. In a small bowl, mix together the cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg, white pepper and cloves. Sprinkle one teaspoon of the mixture into the cavity of the duck. Stir one tablespoon of the soy sauce into the remaining spice mixture and rub evenly over the entire outside of the bird. Cut one of the green onions in half and tuck inside the cavity. Cover and refrigerate the bird for at least 2 hours, or overnight.
Place duck breast side up on a rack in a big enough wok or pot and steam for an hour adding a little more water, if necessary, as it evaporates. Lift duck with two large spoons, and drain juices and green onion.
Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F (190 degrees C). Place duck breast side up in a roasting pan and prick skin all over using a fork.
Roast for 30 minutes in the preheated oven. While the duck is roasting, mix together the remaining 2 tablespoons of soy sauce and honey. After 30 minutes, brush the honey mixture onto the duck and return it to the oven. Turn the heat up to 500 degrees F (260 degrees C). Roast for 5 minutes, or until the skin is richly browned. Do not allow the skin to char.
Prepare the duck sauce by mixing the plum jam with the sugar, vinegar and chutney in a small serving bowl. Chop remaining green onions and place them into a separate bowl. Place whole duck onto a serving platter and garnish with orange slices and fresh parsley. Use plum sauce and onions for dipping.
You might also like
 
Asian Pork Tenderloin
Sensational and simple marinade that compliments the tenderloin well!

 
Chef John's Easy "Peking Duck" Lettuce Cups
A perfect bite of crispy five-spiced roasted duck wrapped in lettuce.

 
Duck Fesenjan
See how to make a savory stew featuring duck, pomegranate, and walnuts.

Get the magazine
Subscribe to Allrecipes Magazine
Get a full year for $10!
Cook 5-star weekday dinners every time.

Footnotes
Tip
Aluminum foil can be used to keep food moist, cook it evenly, and make clean-up easier.