Top 10 Health Benefits of Carrots
First cultivated where the Himalayan and Hindu Kush mountains meet, purple carrots and their yellow alternates were domesticated in the early 10-11th centuries before touching the Mediterranean, and then the Western Hemisphere around 1600. From peas and carrots to carrot cake, this sweet vegetable can be included in many different dishes due to their distinct taste and amazing benefits. We should all take after Bugs Bunny and indulge in this cancer-fighting veggie that carries nutrients to your entire body!

Eye Enhancer: Known for its high concentrations of beta-carotene, which is converted to Vitamin A in the liver, carrots can give your eyesight a huge boost. Eating them regularly can help avoid cataracts, macular degeneration, and night blindness, where eyes have difficulty adjusting in dim settings.
Lower Risk of Cancer: Alpha-carotene, bioflavonoids, and polyacetylenes in this flavorful vegetable are linked with reducing risk of various cancers, especially cancer of the lungs. Drinking around a quart of carrot juice everyday has also proven to have powerful cancer-fighting elements. Another powerful antioxidant falcarinol has been proven to reduce tumors in rats by one-third. Also men who ate carrots at least 3 times a week had a lesser risk of prostate cancer, and were 18% less likely to develop a tumor. Carotenoids are more effective in comparison to beta-carotene supplements, which can be damaging to those who smoke.
Heart Healthy: Studies support that those who include carotenoids, such as beta-carotene, alpha-carotene, and lutein, are associated with a decreased risk of heart disease. Eating carrots habitually can also reduce ‘bad’ cholesterol levels due to their soluble fibers binding to the acids in bile.
Infection Inhibitor: Carrots can also help you fight illness, with Vitamins A, B-6, C, and E which all play an essential role in immune response. These vibrant root vegetables have also been known to help prevent infection. After shredding, boiling, and mashing together, they may be rub substance on cuts to keep them free of infection.
Counteract Memory Loss: A study in the Netherlands depicted that people who ate smaller amounts of root vegetables such as carrots indicated over 3 times more descent in cognition, compared to those who ate the most root veggies. Once again, beta-carotene has shown its prevalence by protecting the central nervous system against aging. Another study conducted at Harvard for 18 years proved that those who consumed 50mg of beta-carotene had a 1 – 1 ½ year delay in cognitive decline compared to those who took a placebo.
Prevents Stroke: According to a study conducted at Harvard, people who consume more than 6 carrots per week are less likely to experience a stroke, in comparison to those who only ate 1 carrot or less per month.
Body Purifying: Carrots consist of many beneficial nutrients, but its high levels of Vitamin A help the liver in cleansing the body of toxins. Vitamin A also purifies your blood and liver. A way to enhance this cleansing tonic is to mix the carrot juice with blueberry juice and coconut water.
Helps Prevent Diabetes: The juice squeezed from carrots are able to stabilize blood sugar, and very rich in silicon and potassium. Beta-carotene is also a notable antioxidant; if it is present in your blood, it’s been proven to lower insulin levels by 32% compared to people who had much lower levels of beta-carotene.
Splendid Skin Outside & In: Making face masks using carrots can make your skin noticeably softer, firmer and smoother. Be careful, too much of this concentrated juice could turn you orange! Take a look at some invigorating homemade facial masks here.
Bone Builder: Small amounts of Vitamin C and calcium are also present within this nutritious super veggie. There are not very high levels of these nutrients when compared to other fruits and vegetables we have discussed, but they are still beneficial, especially in those who are post-menopausal and may be lacking calcium.
