Top 10 Health Benefits of Mangoes
By Health Fitness Revolution - February 18, 20160
Share on Facebook Tweet on Twitter  


One of the royal fruits, the mango is a featured fruit in cuisines around the world. Ripe mangos have a rosy skin and a sweetened golden flesh surrounding the fibrous pit. They are also one of the most broadly ingested fruit in the world, ranging from savory and spicy dishes to sweet tropical smoothies. Here is our list of the top health benefits of mangoes:

Brain Boost: Filled with Vitamin B6, mangoes provide an incredible supply of brain food. B6 is vital to maintain healthy brain function, mood, and sleep cycle.
Decreased Risk of Cancer: The nutrients and antioxidants in mangoes make them a weapon against cancer, especially breast and colon cancers. Mangoes contain various antioxidants, such as beta-carotene, which protect the body against colon, breast, leukemia and prostate cancers.
Improved Digestion: The enzymes within this nutritious fruit aid in the breakdown of proteins, while high fiber and water levels help maintain regularity.
Enhanced Bone Health: By providing higher levels of vitamin C & increasing calcium absorption, bones grow much stronger with regular ingestion of mangoes. Vitamin C also promotes the production of osteoblasts, which are bone-building cells, and also encourages the production of collagen.
Decreased Risk of Obesity & Diabetes: Eating this fruit can improve blood sugar, lipids, and insulin levels by lowering blood sugar levels in diabetics and obese adults.
Decreased Risk of Heart Disease: High fiber & potassium, and low sodium levels help to increase heart health and lower overall mortality rate.
Healthy Eyes, Complexion, Hair: One cup of sliced mango bears 25% of the daily recommended amount of Vitamin A, which maintains healthy vision, prevents night blindness, & also keeps dry eyes moisturized. This vitamin is necessary to develop healthy tissues throughout the body, and especially helps moisturize and keeps hair and skin radiant.
Improved Immunity: This fruit is not only delicious but also helpful in protecting against ailments. Due to the large amount of carotenes, and vitamins A & C, eating mangoes can provide a huge boost to the immune system and prevent you from falling under the weather.
Lowers Cholesterol: Mangoes are packed with plenty of fiber, vitamin C, and pectin, which all assist in decreasing your “bad cholesterol”, or lower serum cholesterol levels (LDL).
Helps to Alkalize the Body: Mangoes have high levels of potassium, which is a necessary electrolyte that alkalizes the body, and regulates the contraction and growth of muscles.